My name is Stephanie Middleton, and I am a student
at Texas A&M University. And today, November 19,
1983, I am interviewing Mr. David Pomeroy, Jr., a
fourth-generation descendant of a Pasadena
founder. He is legal consultant for Pomeroy
Drilling and the former president of the Pasadena
Historical Society. The Pomeroy family has had a
tremendous impact on the growth and progress of
Pasadena. Mr. Pomeroy, let me start off by asking
you a little background history. When did the
Pomeroy family first move to Pasadena and why did
they decide to settle in Pasadena? Pomeroy's came
to Pasadena shortly after the beginning of 1901.
They had been living in Galveston in 1900 and were
caught in the great Galveston storm in September
1900 where over 7,000 people were killed in
Galveston alone. When they woke up the next day
after the storm, the hurricane had hit, they
looked and they could see where they had gone from
Mexico. The day before, there had been about 12
blocks of houses between them and the bay. So they
decided they were a little too close to the water
and started to move back inland. Now, they had
lived in Brenham. and had started the dairy there
in the early 1890s. So they decided, well, let's go
back to Brennan. That's a nice community we know
and we're aware of. They had stopped in Hitchcock
because in-laws had been killed during the war,
during the hurricane. And they needed to tidy up
the business there and to send the survivors up
north to be with other relatives. And after they'd
tidied up there, then my great-grandfather,
Edward Payson, probably put my
great-grandmother on the train along with the
cattle that survived in the old dairy and sent them
on to Brennan like Payson and his son, John Pomboy,
got in a wagon and started heading towards
Brennan. They stopped in the Pasadena area to help
a farmer mend some fences and to hand-dig a
waterway, which Payson had become so proficient
at in the last 10 years and had some sort of
reputation. They decided, this is far enough
inland, the grass is green enough, I think we're
going to settle here, so he set off a telegram and
had Anna return with the cows and be settled in
Pasadena. the place that we're now talking from,
and we purchased in April of 1901. It was the first
piece of property, and this is my office. We're
still here. When your family first settled in
Pasadena, what was the town like, and did your
family have a major role in the community? Well, in
1901, there was a debate as to how many people were
in Pasadena. Part of the debate is, what was
Pasadena? If you look at Pasadena today, it
includes what previously was five different
communities, all half a day's journey from each
other almost by wagon. In the area that we are right
now, the old section of downtown Pasadena, there
was either six or 16 families. I suspect there was
something like, my grandfather took something
over here, the sixth family in Pasadena. I think he
could probably see five other houses. So from
here, there were five other houses within view. A
little bit to the west of us, there were probably
five or six houses over there. East of us, there's a
couple more houses that way. All told, 16 was the
largest number of people that claimed to have been
in the general area in 1901. By 1901, the area was
all perfect. All the trees you see today were
planted by the people that came here. The streets
were, I would say, the original plat, which
encompasses now maybe 15, 20% of what the
community is in size, you would have only a handful
of streets. Main Street was laid out. It was a
graded dirt street. The Port Road, which is now
Texas Highway 225, was a dirt road. We had a
railroad track through town and Shaver and Pitts.
And that's about all the streets at one time at a
time. We have one more, which is Shaw. then called
Fit Street.
The orientation of the community was around the
railroad track. The area didn't open up until the
railroads came in through the area.
Let me say, as far as the Home Roy's role in the
community, in the early days in particular, There
were several of the earlier families that played a
significant role and carried the community. In
those days, you couldn't hire someone else to do
it. There wasn't someone else to do the job. You had
to do the job yourself. They got very strong about
schools. So everyone initially took turns being
either on the school board or carrying out the
functions of the school board. And as far as
churches, you just didn't passively attend
churches. There were no churches. You either
started a church, or you sped off from a church, or
you were heathen and you didn't want to be a
heathen. But there were some major families, and I
like to consider them sort of family groupings.
The Pomeroy's were related by marriage to the
McMasters and the Williams. Now, the Williams
came earlier. They came in 1893 or 94, just forms.
Pomerose came in 1901, and McMaster's came in
1912. But McMaster girls married Williams and
farmers of Pomerose. So we participated in many
things together. The same thing happened for the
Parks family. The Parks family came in 1901, later
in the year, or 1902, pardon me. And they married
with the the Blakesways and the Atkinsons and the
Fortwoods and the Jacksons, and they sort of as a
group formed another nucleus. Now, I might point
out, I'm sure I'll mention it more often, the
community in the early days after the churches
were initially founded was broken into, again,
two groups. There was the Baptist and there was the
Methodist. The Pomeranians were the Baptist and
the Parks were the Methodist. It just sort of
worked out that way. You had a couple of others. You
had the Oscar Cruz group, which is Swedish
immigrants that settled out off of Ritchie
Street, and they had a settlement out there. They
were very influential in the school districts, so
they had a huge contribution there. And there was
Mr. A.R. Cruz and his family. He was a businessman.
He had the first bus company in town, the first
insurance company in town, the first plumbing
company in town, the first drive-in in town. And it
was all the same goal. It's just different
services, whatever you needed. That's the way
they were. Everybody just, whatever you needed,
someone came up with it.
The Pomeroy's, like most of the earlier basic
families in the community, or the two or three
major families, got involved. When they came to
town, there was no church. And there was a halo to
call about it. a denominational group that was
meeting in an adjoining city. An adjoining city is
Deepwater, which is now part of Pasadena, but it's
about three miles from here. So that was a Sunday
morning, got up early to get on some gondola in
Deepwater and came back. So they moved the church
to Pasadena, or at least they moved it to Pasadena.
And my great-grandfather, Payson Pomeroy, and
his wife, Anna, were original charter members.
First Baptist Church. There were 17 charter
members. The Williams were also charter members.
The McMaster's weren't here yet since this is
1901.
School board, my great-grandfather was an early
school board member, served for several years
until his death in 1906.
After that, My grandfather was like 17 at the time,
and when he got into his mid-20s, then he too got on
the school board and served, I believe, some 17
years. So they got involved in what needed to be
done. The city needed water service. This is on in
the 30s, 20s, partly. And the Palmers were water
well drillers, so they went and drilled a city
water well and ran pipes to all the houses that
needed and had the franchise to serve water before
the town became incorporated. They sold it to the
city. That's the beginnings of the water
department we have now. So we were involved in most
everything that was going on.
Your grandfather, John Edward Pomeroy, Sr., had a
great impact on Pasadena's progress. What were
some of his contributions?
Well, John, when he came to Pasadena, was 12 years
old.
When his father died in 1906, he had to assume
responsibility for the family. At the time, we had
a dairy and some farming, as most everybody else
here had a little strawberry patch out back, or
figs, or cantaloupes, or satsuma oranges, a whole
host of crops. And they were, everybody was
farming 10 to, to 20 acres is the size of the farms.
And John was involved with that.
As he grew a little bit older and solved his basic
problem of earning a living for his mother and
himself, then he began to get involved in the
community. He married a schoolteacher. And so he
became very interested in the school system.
Grandmother used to always have a room available
for school teaching. They would hire a teacher and
they would only hire him for a session at a time.
They invariably would either room with the
Pomeroy's or the Parks or maybe the Cruzes,
whoever had an extra room, but we always had a room.
In fact, I sort of laughed because as my
grandfather had children, they ran out of rooms to
rent, so my great-grandmother built a house next
door so she could continue to rent rooms out. And
that's where my uncle met his wife. and several
other people in the community met their wives. So
he got involved. He was on the school board. He was a
member of the school board when they decided to
establish a high school. He was on the school board
when they decided to establish a junior high
school. And there were some times in there he said
that everybody was mad at him because he wanted to
buy a lot of land so that the school would have room
to expand on. And that policy has seemed to
continue with the school district because if
you'll notice anywhere the school has bought land
for its site. It's not just a site big enough for a
school. It's a site big enough for expansion or
maybe a couple of schools. And probably the best
real estate developer in town is the school
district. My grandfather was also involved very
much in community,
well, in his business, homeowner drilling. At
that time, it was McMaster and Palmer, a water
watch company. He had gone in business with his
brother-in-law, Clyde McMaster. It seems that my
grandfather, because of his father, knew a little
bit about digging water bottles. Basically, it
was originally, it was he and Doug, and then he got
to thinking, They were grinding the sugar cane,
which he had a sugar cane field, and they'd take,
the grinder would be in the middle, they'd have a
pole go out, they'd have a horse, and the horse
would walk around and around and around. He got to
thinking, well, if I stick a
shovel type device or something in the middle and
let the pole go around and around and around, I can
dig a hole. So he started doing that. I met my
grandmother. They got married and got to talking
to his brother-in-law. And his brother-in-law
said, well, I got an engine. Why don't you use my
engine and your little turning device there? And
they started a water bottle business. And my
grandfather was also, with respect to the farming
business, Pasadena, in the mid-'20s, decided
that when they harvested the crop, put it on the
railroad cars and shipped them out of town. They
had to go into Houston and deposit the bill of
ladings with the banks there in order to get paid.
And he and some of the other businessmen in the town
said, well, gee, we ought to do that here in
Pasadena. Why should we have to go to Houston?
Well, the same idea occurred to some Houston
people. They said, well, let's open up a branch in
Pasadena. So on the same day in 1919, two banks
opened. One owned by a group of Houston people, and
one owned and parked by my grandfather. Two years
later, the Pasadena bank took over the Houston
Bank, and that's still the largest bank in town,
first passing the state bank. My grandfather
served on the board of directors of that bank for
some, I have to check, but I think about 34 years.
And now my father has taken its place. My uncle
also, my master also served on the board of
directors of that bank for many, many years.
My grandfathers also involved in the civic
affairs in the community. He was an early member of
the Pasadena Rotary Club. It's a business service
club in the community. It is still the prima donna
club. It's where all the business can be once a
week. He was an active member of that, held several
offices in it. And one of the big things with him is
he had a perfect attendance record. And he had a
perfect attendance record. My father's now in it.
He's been in it 16 years, and he's got perfect
attendance, and I've been in it two years now, and
I've got perfect attendance. Let's see, there was
one other area that I was going to mention. Oh, the
churches. My grandfather was involved in the
churches.
As I mentioned earlier, my great-grandfather
helped found First Baptist Church and my
grandfather was raised in that church and felt
very strong about it and continued to serve in many
leadership as well as teaching positions in the
church.
The other area of involvement with my grandfather
would naturally be the business that he had in the
community. and I feel that it had an impact upon the
community and helping it in its growth. What
impact did the Pomeroy business have on the
community? Now you're going to nail me to the wall
here, okay? Pomeroy started out first with the
dairy business and then the farming business. And
back in those days, everybody would trade off and
help each other. In fact, I have my grandfather's
book where he's listed today. I worked three hours
for Parks, and then a little later, ODC Parks came
and worked three hours for us. So he employed as
well as helped other people. As he got into the
water well business, first, they naturally were
drilling wells in the area for the farmers so that
they would not have to bring their wagons with the
barrels on it down to up Main Street here to right
across the street where the artesian well was
until they got to take it back and try to put it on
their berries and whatever. But he drilled water
in their field. So he helped them not only improve
their agricultural, but also to expand so that the
community began to grow because water was
available at different places. We had a major
strawberry growing company from Houston that
came to pass in. It had something like 58 acres of
berries under cultivation, and Tom Moore drilled
the well for them. As the ship channel industries
came in here, they required water. And Tom Moore's
had drilled water wells for, man, I guess I have to
say, everyone. I can't think of one. Michelle
came. They drilled three of them for the first year
because they knew they needed that amount of
water. The Pomeroy's provided that critical
element of water. Because if you look
historically at how towns are developed, it's
always a long walk. Towns always need water. So the
Pomeroy's, if the river wasn't there, then the
Pomeroy's would provide the water for them. They
eventually wound up providing water for most of
Houston. And like they got with the railroads, the
railroads would put the drilling rig on the flat
car. They'd go down 50 miles, and they'd unload.
The Pomeroy's drilled a well. back of the
railroad, go down 50 miles, and drop it off.
Because these were steam locomotives and they
needed water. So they provided water every 50
miles for the locomotives to stop and replace
themselves. I know the last count that we had was
something over 2,000 water wells. We drilled
water wells specifically for the concrete
companies that built the Astrodome. That was our
last major contribution. But Rice Hotel, Warwick
Hotel, Travis, Travis, hotel, all those old
hotels. We drilled them apart. Dad's fond of
saying that when John Glenn went up and came back
and his capsule was on display, went up into space,
and his capsule was on display in Houston, they
were on one corner and Pomeroy was down on the other
corner reworking a water well through a manhole.
The water well was in the basement, so they parked
on the street and took the manhole and they were
reworking it. And he'd say, the line would start at
the capsule, and he would come by the water well rig
and say, what are you doing? What are you doing? We
provided a lot of water. Also, well, I mentioned
the early water well system. The Pasadena needed a
water well system. The Conway was built a water
well system. We were the first ones in the Pasadena
to have a bath tank, and we still have that bath
tank. I was talking to an early settler once, and he
said, yes, if you wanted to tie onto the Conway
water system, they didn't have a lot of valves. So
what you did, you took your hacksaw, and you got
your pipe, and you went out there and started
sawing. The line was under pressure, so water
started going everywhere, and you'd keep sawing,
and you'd pull the pipe, and you'd do your joints,
and you'd stick them back together. I hope you
didn't drown in the process. But they also hired
many, many people on those jobs. During the
summer, they'd have as many as 30 or 40 people
employed. And invariably, it would be
schoolteachers, because the bombers were very
close to the school, like the coaches and the
woodshop teachers. And any male teacher, they
didn't, they didn't hire females. Nothing
prejudiced, it's just women didn't want to get
that dirty or work that hard. And there's one of the
stories of Carol Teague, who's down on the State
Board of Education. He was a woodshop teacher, and
his wife was expecting a child, and he was the only
short on funds. My grandfather found out about it,
and he says, well, Carol, you know, we've got these
jobs, why don't you come and work for us? So Carol
worked, I believe it was, 72 hours straight or
something. I forget exactly how the story goes.
But anyway, he made enough money, finished the
job, went back home, his wife had the baby, and he
could pay cash for it. So there's a lot of little
stories like that with the Palmeiras. You talk to
any old Tigers and they say, well, yeah, I used to
work for the Palmeiras one summer. It was amazing.
They probably hired a couple thousand people in
the course of their history.
What was your grandfather's influence on the
people in Pasadena? Well, we covered some of that
above. I would say probably the thing most people
remember him about was he was a peacemaker. I had
never really realized this until I went to his
funeral. And the preacher was out there talking
about Brother John. Everybody called him Brother
John. And he said when Brother John saw things were
getting a little out of hand, he'd always put his
hand up and sort of wave it and say, just take it
easy. And I remember that. I never really thought
about it. And there were times when, like, the
school wanted to, pardon me, the church wanted to
expand. They wanted to buy the land behind it. And
the people behind them just wouldn't sell. They'd
always send for the job. And he just had a way of
talking to people. People had confidence in him.
And they'd work out some sort of compromise. When
the bank wanted to expand space and buy a new site,
they couldn't work out a deal. After about a year,
they'd send for the job. And he'd go work it out. He
was always long on advice. He was a slow,
deliberate, kind person. He was extremely
religious. He was a living example of what he
talked about. So often you get upset about people
in religion that make all these things about being
religious, and they go out and catch them doing
things that you say, well, you know, he's not
living. My grandfather lived an example. He was
involved with the church, as I had mentioned
earlier, with his father that he served, first
Baptist church, okay? Got to one point where there
was a rift in the church. And he said, well, you
know, I'm still going to church, and I don't like
this church. So a group of them went across the
street and started another church. It was
Memorial Baptist Church, and it's still here.
After several years, the old group started making
up. So they came back in to First Baptist Church and
they taught the preacher with them. This is about
1940. A preacher, John Morgan. He was there, I
think, until 1965. Okay, about 58 or so, they got,
the church decided that the town had moved beyond
them, so they wanted to move out. And they asked
Brother John what he thought. He said, I think
that's an excellent suggestion, but I'm used to
walking one block just to the First Baptist
Church. So if you all move on out there, we'll start
a new Baptist Church. So South Main Baptist Church
was started. So he had, again, three churches in
the community. He served in leadership and all of
those. He was a school teacher for the men's class
probably 20 years. Same thing for my grandmother.
She was very much involved. She taught many, many
years in that church.
The, another, besides being the peacemaker, also
many people came to my grandfather for financial
advice. He was a very hard worker. He had a
reputation of trying to be fair on any deal.
And when people had monetary questions, they
would come and ask him, and he would give him, I know
Grant Sexton, the photographer at the time. I
think he tells me the story every time I see him.
Your grandfather told you that? You just own this
man right here, and we'll be security forever.
So.
How have the lifestyles of people in Pasadena
changed since the day of your grandfather?
Tremendous. My grandfather came here in 1901. He
came in a wagon. I have in one of his diaries, in the
intro, about 1902, where he's out on the farm
there, and he sees a car come down, 225, in the port
road. And he noted the second car he'd ever seen in
his life. By the time of his death, 1981, we were
walking in the noon. So technologically, he saw a
tremendous amount of change. From a community
standpoint, when he came, there was no religious
community. There is a tremendous religious
community in the town now. There was an
unincorporated school with a one room, about 12
students. And this is not only just Pasadena, it
was the greater Pasadena area. They were pulling
them in from Deepwater and from South Houston and
on over towards where Arco is now. So they came from
everywhere. He saw the religion and the education
of the community change. It was a high priority, as
the churches were. So he had his guiding hand in the
development of the school district. And I think
it's shown that the community is still very strong
in education.
The social lifestyle of the community at that time
was very much tied around the churches. And it was
you went to church Sunday morning, and then Sunday
afternoon, you had a church event. And that's
where everybody got together, the Baptists and
the Methodists. And they would have sometimes
competitions against each other. There would be
sack races and horseshoe pitching and all of those
types of things. But it was a very slow life. I
recall from him. He got up. His diaries reflect
that he would get up in the morning, and he would
hoe, and then he would go work for someone else, and
then the preacher would come over and forget where
he'd ever been. It was very, almost a humble
existence, because on his birthday, his entry,
after a whole day worth of activities, he said, and
it was my birthday. And that was the end of it. There
was no big, great celebrations.
There was no industry. The workers that worked in
agriculture If you owned the property, you
exchanged with each other your time. If you were a
worker, a picker, for instance, or a cultivator
that came in, you got paid at the end of the season.
When the thing was harvested, it turned into
money, then you got paid. Along the way, you would
receive some tokens. Tokens were redeemable in
local stores, so you could get your groceries. Or
the local merchants would just carry you. And they
knew you worked for John, The park's over here, so
they just wrote your name down in the ledger book.
And when you got through, you came in and you paid
your bill. One of the saddest things to me is when I
returned from college in the 60s and found the
front door of my family's house locked. Because
when I left in 59, nobody locked the door so fast.
There was no problem. It was a very honorable
community. Everybody knew everybody. There
might be one or two rotten people in town, but they
knew not to bother anybody. They'd go out, they'd
get drunk, and they'd go raise a little hell. But
that was it.
Industry came in, starting in 1917, 1918. late 30s
is when it really started growing. And the town
started as six families, which grew very slowly up
until the 30s. There was like 2,500 people in
Pasadena in the mid-30s, and just over and out, and
just mushroomed. You had people coming in that
just needed rooms, and so they started building
more. At that point, you stayed with someone until
the house became available. Or maybe after about
four or five years, you could afford to build your
own. Invariably, it was a two-room type
structure. Kitchen, living room combination
with the bedroom. And if you had your own, they
slept in the bedroom. And after a couple years, you
saved up some money and you built another room. The
Parks House is notorious for that. They started
out as a two-room house, and they had a successful
strawberry crop, and they built a kitchen off
that. another one they built two bedrooms
upstairs and another one they built the dining
room and the house is a whole progression of
additions there were very few there wasn't a
wealthy class in the community everybody had
about the same amount of money nobody flashed it
around
everybody pitched in and the community has just
grown and changed and has become I went through a
period there in the 50s and 60s of being your
typical bedroom community.
One of the, I think, prime community. In 1929, I
passed into the corporation for the final time.
And they hired two policemen, two motorcycle
policemen. They passed me and got a reputation as
being a speed track. Well, I'm sure in 1929, there
wasn't even a handful of vehicles. But during
World War II, we had one motorcycle cop, and that
was his job, just buying tickets. It's like when
you went through passing, you expected to get a
ticket, because you were going to get a ticket. And
I used to, I'm sure other people felt the same way,
in the 50s, saying, well, the police department's
really great on traffic, but if there is a crime or
something, they wouldn't know what to do with it.
Nowadays, we have a regional crime lab in
Pasadena. We have a very sophisticated police
force. We still have very strong traffic control.
You still get a ticket in Pasadena.
Yeah, let's see, lifestyles. What other areas of
lifestyles?
Religion, we've moved beyond Baptist and
Methodist. Somehow, Catholics slept in the
community. and then the Church of Christ, and the
Lutheran, and the Episcopals. We even have a
Korean missionary church in town. So other
religions found their way in Pasadena.
Let's see, cultural activities. Well, we
progressed beyond the picnics, but we still have a
ways to go. That's another whole story someday
I'll tell you. How has your family influenced
Pasadena's educational system? Ah, education.
Well, besides being on the school board, both my
great-grandfather and my grandfather, which
were the early formative days, and they set the
tenor of where we are today, I feel, the Pomeroy's
mirrored into a bunch of school teachers. So we
were, I think we got some influence in that
direction. Clyde McMaster lost two of his wives to
death. And when he married Clayton McMaster, the
wife that survived him, she was a schoolteacher.
And I forgot to mention, Clyde was also on the
school board. Let's
see. Clyde McMaster was on the school board. John
Pomeroy was on the school board. 16 years. Payson
Pomeroy was on the school board and Ben Williams
was on the school board. Lois Williams became Lois
Pomeroy. Fleeta Matthews became Fleeta
McMasters. Irma McMasters became Irma Williams.
And I'm sure we have another school teacher, too,
in there. Lois Pomoy was in charge of teacher
training in the elementary levels for about 10, 15
years. And she was responsible for, I don't know if
it was a school program or her own program, but each
year she would have her grandfather come in to the
assembled elementary school and give them a
lecture on Pasadena's history.
Oh, yes, I forgot to mention that one of the
elementary schools in town is Pomeroy Elementary
School, named for my great-grandfather's
grandfather. It's always an amazement to me to
have someone say, oh, yes, my child graduated from
Pomeroy Elementary. Gee.
Most of Pasadena's growth has been over the last 30
years. What impact has your family had in
contributing to Pasadena's progress during this
period?
You know, I have to confess that the Pomeroy impact
was in the earlier days, in the formative stage,
the setting up of the basic foundations for the
community, the basic institutions, and they had a
tremendous impact. Although there weren't near
as many people, they were extremely visible in
participating in what they did. In the last 30
years or so, one of
the things I have to relate to you is sort of an
agreement my grandfather had. When he married my
grandmother in 1811 and inherited a
brother-in-law, Clyde McMaster, They decided
they were going into business together, one of the
businesses I mentioned earlier. John was a farm
boy type thing. He was, as I said, sort of slow,
easy, and he was mechanically minded, and it was
hard, hard work. It had to be all of his luck.
Applied, had had been around quite a bit. He had
participated in some of the drilling for oil
wells. And he had this engine, and he had worked
with farmers on rice farms in a pretty good area
around the state. And he was sort of a
wheeler-dealer-mover type guy. And so my
grandfather says, I'll tell you what, Clyde. He
said, I'll keep working with the water well
business, and I'll keep the money coming in. And
why don't you take care of the community
obligations for us? I've got my church. And at the
time, he had the school board. He did a little
school board in there. He said, you just take care
of the other things. So Clyde McMaster sort of took
over the homeroom responsibility for community
involvement. Clyde was mayor of Pasadena
1931 to 1939.
There was only one other mayor that was in office
for eight years. That was Delbert Atkinson. That
followed, immediately followed him. Clyde was
there when the community made a radical change in
the 30s from the farming warring community into
what is now an industrial community. So he was part
of that driving force that pulled us sort of out of
the dark ages, if you will. Clyde was also a charter
member of the Rotary Club. He got my grandfather to
participate because he thought it was important
that we do that. But Clyde was the type of person
that says, well, what we need to do is get the
businessmen together. Grandfather...
The business had grown beyond the community,
probably within the last 30 years or so. It took him
out of town. And he was not in town all that much.
Continued to hire from the local community.
Talked very good about that. Continued to
influence the churches, as I mentioned earlier.
But in the school board, up until 19... When was
that? Well, I
had... Up into the, oh, 1934. Then you get into the
40s and on, and he's off doing his business as he's
left it to Clyde and also my uncle, Everett
Williams, one of the Williams family I mentioned
earlier. He was involved in city council. He was
the water commissioner in town. He was also chief
of the volunteer fire department for a period of
time and a lifelong member of the volunteer fire
department. Not until the
last... I'd say five years or so that we got
re-involved in the community. And most of that
involvement has been through myself. I had been
away for a period of time. I'd lived in Ohio and I'd
been off to college and all that. When I came back to
the community, my grandfather had retired and my
father had the business. My great-grandfather
Clyde, I mean, my great-uncle Clyde McMaster had
died also, so it wasn't that many of the
Pomeranians left, and the rest of them had moved
out of the community into retirement areas. So I
felt some sort of responsibility.
One thing was preserving the history of the
community, so I got back involved in the history of
the community and became president of the
Historic Society for a couple of years and
continued to write their newsletter. I got
involved... in the Chamber of Commerce. I felt one
of the things that the community needed was some
statistical information for, or community
information, really, beyond statistical. You
need statistical for businesses that want to come
into the community or communities that want to
grow. And they said, well, what's the population
of the community? Where is the population? What
are the trends? What's your employment level?
Economic scale and all of that. So I got very
involved in pulling together that type of
information to make it available. Also,
promotional materials about the community. Not
only, I call them promotional, but people coming
into the community and saying, what is Pasadena?
What's the quality of life? What's the religious
atmosphere? What's the school atmosphere? Those
types of things. So we've tried to pull that
together so that these people will know what
Pasadena is. And then the often overlooked area
that you want to communicate with is the people
within the community. They live there. They work
there. And quite often, they say, well, I don't
really know what Pasadena is. I didn't know that
about Pasadena. And so we're trying to, we're
pulling together, we're promoting Pasadena to
Pasadenas.
Some of us feel there's an image problem. Well,
we're trying to work on that. We're trying to get
the people of Pasadena first to feel good about
Pasadena. When we feel good about our community,
then it radiates. And other people know. And
that's half of the publicity promotion jobs want.
I got drafted into Rotary, as I mentioned earlier.
And there's been involved in quite a few things in
promoting the community. So Palm Roys are again
shaping the direction of the community.
In your opinion, what are the reasons behind
Pasadena's tremendous growth and change over the
last several decades? Well, let's put it And let me
give you sort of an overview. The community was
founded in 1895,
97 era. It depends on where you want to draw the line
in the beginning, okay? In the 1890s, railroads
were put into the era. Up to that point, it was just
ranching. And with the railroads, there came a
group of promoters that said, hey, let's open this
up, sell some land.
The cities of La Porte, Deer Park, Deepwater,
Seabrook, Kima, Genoa, South Houston, and
Pasadena all came into existence within about 10
years of each other. Today, Pasadena is 125,000
people. And if you combine the populations of all
those other communities, you might get 60,000.
They all started out basically the same way. Some
of them had a little more advantages. Pasadena was
the only town that didn't have a hotel. First thing
a developer did was to build a hotel. You'd run an ad
in New York or Illinois or Indiana and have people
come down to buy land. The promised land, the
sunbelt. For that reason, they had it. And they'd
come and they'd stay in the hotel. Well, Pasadena
didn't have a hotel. By 1910, 1920, La Porte had a
couple thousand people. Deer Park had a couple of
hundred people, and Pasadena would have had less
than a hundred. But Pasadena, for some reason,
eventually attracted more people. It got rid of
people from deep water and said, well, I think I'm
going to go over to Pasadena. I've got a couple of
real cute stories on that. And Pasadena just,
perhaps with palm oil and water, was able to grow as
an agricultural center. And we grew more than any
of the other cities. We continued as an
agricultural community on into the 30s. Now, our
character changed in the 30s. The Houston Ship
Channel, which was a dream of the people from
Houston, and they had been working on it since
pre-1900,
started promoting it as a ship channel. They
dredged it out. They got an oil company by the name
of Sinclair to come and build a place in 1917.
Forgotten. Crown came the year before, Crown
Refinery. They had all this oil down in
Spindletop, Goose Creek, and Baytown. And the
people in Houston says, well, gee, we ought to have
a shipping port. If we refine it here instead of
sending it up to those Standard of Indiana and all
that Sinclair people up there, we need it here. So
they started promoting Houston Ship Channel.
Well, that was going on in the background Pasadena
more or less ignored it. That's on its northern
boundary. And it was looking south where all the
farming was. And we were shipping. And that just
sort of existed back there. But in the 1930s, 1937,
Champion Paper decided to open up a mill in
Pasadena. Because one of the major industries in
Houston was a lumber. Jesse Jones, who most
everybody knows, was very big in the lumber
business. Champion decided to open up a mill. When
Champion opened, they hired several hundred
people. And what happened there was that it
provided a choice to the labor market. Labor
market up to this point, when you worked, you
worked until the end of the season, you got your
pay. But with the industry, you got paid every
week. And you had a job 52 weeks out of the year, 53,
how many years there is. So the choice was, okay,
well, let's go to work for the industry. The
industry also needed more than the local market,
so it started bringing people in. As they brought
people in, they needed houses. Houses and people
needed grocery stores and laundries and movie
houses and city government. So 37 became a major
turn in the shift in Pasadena. This was just the
beginning of a just phenomenal growth in the
community. It came from 2000 in the first half. of
Pasadena's existence to now under 25,000 in the
second half, basically equal periods of time. But
37 was the beginning.
Although we didn't, the United States didn't
enter into World War II until the 40s, the effect of
the war was felt locally in Pasadena as early as
1938-39 because the U.S. people and industry
supported the war effort in Europe. So we geared up
the petroleum industry down here with the oil
refining to provide petro for the allies. We also
worked on chemicals with Sinclair Chemical
Corporation, which is now
Petrotex, well, Arco is the refining side of
Petrotex. It's the chemical side of the deal.
Goodyear Rubber, all of these started about that
period of time. Houston Shipbuilding and Brown
Brothers Shipbuilding started at that time, and
they employed thousands of people. So all of a
sudden this community that had supported some
farms and one or two small refineries, then a paper
mill with about 500 people, is now an employment
center for thousands and thousands of people. So
the communities just started growing in leaps and
bounds.
To give you an example, in 1940, the population of
Pasadena was 3,400. It had grown seven times by
1950 to 22,000.
It grew two and a half times during the 50s to 58,000
in the 60s and continued to grow at the rate of about
3,000 a year on up through the 1980s. Now, one of the
perennial questions I have is, why Pasadena? I
mentioned Deepwater, Deer Park, the port, South
Houston, all of those communities. What happened
there? Well, Deer Park was all but abandoned when
Shell came in in the late 30s. And so they had to
start from scratch as far as a community. It was
strictly a veteran community associated with
Shell. The port's orientation was supposedly to
shipping. Because it was the port of opportunity.
That's what the port was supposed to be. But they
had developed over the years Sylvan Beach. So it
became the playground, the recreation
community. And everything was related to that.
They didn't take, they weren't in a position to
take advantage of what's happening during World
War II. South Houston is rail-oriented. It's not
port-oriented. So they were not directly able to
take care, to take advantage of the industry.
However, the first aviation in the area was in
South Houston. They had the first airplane
manufacturing facility in Harris County that I'm
aware of. And Allentown Airport space was built
because of that during World War I. Okay? And then
reactivated in World War II. We had the first, the
largest bomber school in the nation or something
during World War II out of Delaware. But those
didn't provide a strong economic base, as did the
industry. Again, the shipbuilding stuff, the
chemical and petroleum directly related to
Pasadena. And Pasadena was in place, now had
government, it had the basic services, and we just
took advantage of what was there. We attracted a
couple of influential, that is, dynamic people
into the community. And they took the lead as far as
providing development.
Delbert Atkinson was one of those people, as was
Herbert Tarter,
Anderson. They formed the real estate
development firm of Tarter, Atkinson, and
Anderson. And all of the stuff along Tarter
Street, which was renamed in Herbert Tarter's
honor, was all a development. They knew how to work
the government programs. They got the funding for
the houses. And so they were throwing up houses as
fast as you could possibly do it. But the industry
and the housing, we were able to capture the
people. Our growth has continued to track that at
the Houston Ship Channel. As it has diversified
and there's more chemical companies and the
shipping has increased, we've been able to take
advantage of that. And we've continued the
initial momentum. Strong with the churches,
strong with the schools, so we're a strong family
community. We had a tremendous number, in fact,
probably the basis for our growth during this
period, people that came out of East Texas. They
were coming to Pasadena to make money in the
industry, and then they were going back to East
Texas. They never made it back to East Texas.
They're still here. They still keep saying, I'm
going to go back to East Texas. A lot of them have
retired, back to East Texas, and said, well, my
friends are back in Pasadena. So they moved back to
Pasadena. So we've continued that. We were also
able to take advantage of what happened down in
Clear Lake with NASA and the stuff that was
developing down there. When Exxon was developing
Clear Lake, it was developed as an executive-type
town. A lot of the non-managerial workers were
located in Pasadena because the housing was
cheaper. It had a good school system and the other
things that we mentioned before. So we've been
able to take advantage of that. In the last 10
years, we've got a new type of growth going on in the
community. It's not so much in numbers as it is in
quality, quality of life in the community. Up
until the late 50s, Pasadena sort of viewed itself
as a bedroom community. If you wanted anything in
the way of culture, entertainment, all those
types of things, you went to Houston. If you wanted
a good place to eat, you went to Houston. This was a
local community with basic services. What with
the oil crisis in the 70s, it got expensive to get to
Houston for number one. The city was growing so
fast that the road system was not that adequate, so
it began to take longer to get into Houston. Some of
the racial problems they had in Houston, People
said, well, I think I just want to stay in my own
community. So in the last 10 years, five years,
three years, we've started saying, hey, we need to
provide some of those things in our own community
ourselves. And so we've got this new form of
growth. And as we provide those things, it begins
to attract more in the way of professional
services, more attorneys, accountants,
doctors, the medical profession in this
community in the last 10 years is phenomenal. The
quality change that we've gotten. The hospitals.
I wouldn't have come to passing a hospital 10 years
ago or five years ago. But now we've got some
outstanding things. We've got some equipment
that are second only to the Texas Medical Center.
Better than any place else in the world. We're tied
to the Texas Medical Center with the emergency
helicopter service. So if they can't handle it
here, they can get you into Houston.
We talked about religion. Religion, as always,
had an important role in Pasadena. Was your family
involved in Pasadena's religious community?
Well, I think we beat that horse to death. We've
covered that before. I hate to repeat a lot of the
things that I've said in the past, but in a
nutshell, yes, I believe we have. religion is a
very strong thing. It continues to be a very strong
thing. It has shaped the communities in some ways
positive, some ways negative. We don't have all
the denominational beliefs in the community. I
don't know if it's because the Protestants have
just spread their elbows and said, no, this is our
territory, or what it's been. I know the Catholics
tease a little bit about having to fight their way
into the community.
Let me just wrap that up by saying that religion has
played a significant role in the community. It
does today. The religious community is very much
involved. It's an outreach type religion. It's
not a, you know, you just come to us on Sundays type
thing. It caters to the needs of all the people.
It's going out aggressively after specialty
groups, battered wives and alcoholism. The
Catholic group put together and all the other
religious communities supported this Pasadena
family time. which is the objective there is to
bring the family a little closer together. Some of
their specific programs is like on a certain
night, you pledge that you will spend the evening
with your family and family activities. The
restaurants and towns have given discounts. If
you bring your family in on like Thursday night,
you get 10% off and those types of things. So, you
know, religion is a very dominant force
in the community. You know, one of those little...
sort of funny type things you like to throw in from
time to time. I hope it doesn't ruffle anybody's
feathers. But one of the contributions that
religion has made to the community, it's a strange
partnership with Sherwood Pryor, who owns the
Gillies. It seems that Pasadena at one point was
sort of the late bloomer in the prohibition era.
Although the United States had prohibition back
in the 20s and came out of that, the Baptists
decided back in the late 40s that, gee, we ought to
have prohibition in Pasadena. And so they got
together, organized a group, and voted Pasadena
dry. So you couldn't buy alcohol or serve alcohol
and say, well, it's Pasadena. Election came back
up in the 50s, and I don't know if this necessarily
is true, but I've heard that the bootleggers and
the bear joints around the outside of the city
provided money to the Baptists to underwrite the
campaign to continue to keep Pasadena dry. so the
competition would stay out of the area. Since
then, Pasadena has incorporated a lot of areas,
and everybody's afraid to bring the issue up. So
the new areas, you can have outfall. They're wet.
The old areas of Pasadena, you can't have outfall.
And everybody's afraid to bring the issue up,
afraid it'll go one way or the other, so we have a
divided city.
What was the fabulous 50s like for the Pomeroy's in
Pasadena? Well, since I was a teenager in the
fabulous 50s, it was fabulous. Fabulous 50s for
Pasadena was a breaking out of the old downtown
area. In the early 50s, well, the commercial
district of Pasadena centered around 225 and
parallel street would be Shaw, just north of that,
and ran from Shaver, to Main Street, about two,
three blocks. And that was, everything was within
that area. City Hall, all the commercial
establishments. With the 40s, we had had, you
know, Woolworth came into town, and we had dress
shops, and specialty clothes shops, and movie
houses, and, you know, we were high cotton there.
In the 50s, with the population, as I mentioned
earlier, now up to 22,000, we ran out of room. We
started growing south. All of the old strawberry
farms became subdivisions. And you look at the
subdivision names, and you can see who owned land
there. There's McMaster and Pomeroy
subdivision. There's a Park subdivision one,
Park subdivision two, Park subdivision three.
There's a Parker subdivision. All of the old
names, also on the streets. But we had the first
commercial step out, really. Sears, well, a guy by
the name of John Campbell came to Pasadena. And he
built the Campbell Centers. Now the Campbell
Centers were down in Southmoor. Southmoor was
just probably gravel when he started it, probably
blacktop when he finished it. Everybody thought
he was crazy because you couldn't even see
Southmoor from Pasadena. But he started that out
there. There were a few subdivision houses out
there. Carter and Atkinson were accommodating.
Campbell built a few homes of his own, so they
started growing out there. He got Sears to come out
to his shaver and south wall. And all of a sudden,
you know, the downtown was moving away.
Businessmen downtown made a mistake. Or the
government. I'm not sure. I don't know exactly who
did it. They decided we're going to raise some
revenue. We're going to put in parking meters. So
they put in parking meters downtown. And, of
course, everybody just complained about putting
pennies in a parking meter. There were pennies
there. So when Campbell built his thing,
advertising, free parking, the merchants
downtown said, wait a minute, so there was, like on
Thursdays you could park downtown free. But it was
a losing battle because the handwriting was on the
wall. I first passed it in the state bank, realized
that, and moved out to Southmore and Carter in the
early, I think 1960s when they opened up out there.
City Hall opened up out there at the same time.
hospitals. The two downtown hospitals closed and
new ones opened up. First Baptist Church moved
from its original location in the old downtown
area into the new neighborhoods. So we had a
tremendous shift going on there. Unfortunately,
there was a guy by the name of Corrigan, Leo
Corrigan from that came into Pasadena in the late
40s and said, boy, I'm going to build me a super
shopping center. And we built it in the old
downtown area. And by the mid-50s, everybody was
leaving downtown. But it was great for me because,
boy, there was a movie theater right down the
street. I'd ride my bicycle down here to the
Saturday matinee, go in at 9 o'clock and come out at
4 in the afternoon. I used to pick blackberries
there a couple years earlier. And the drive-ins
came to town, you know, the drive-in restaurants
where you would go to Trainers. You may not even
remember Trainers. Trainers is now where
7-Eleven is over there by the port, 225. That was a
drive-in. Down at the other end of town was the
Corat. And, you know, in the 50s, we'd get in our
cars and we'd drive down to the Trainers and we'd
drive around to see if we knew anybody. And then
we'd drive down to the other end to see if we knew
anybody, try picking up somebody in between. That
was the day of American Band Standing. That was
probably, that was the decade I learned to dance.
We had, although the band just don't give a dance,
even the men just do, okay? But that's all right.
It's not Sunday, you know, you do what you want. And
learned to dance, teen canteen type thing.
That was back in my courting days. The Hugh Pastino
Rodeo, okay, it starts back in the 50s. Mm-hmm. And
I forgot to mention that the biggest recreational
activity in town was the Pasadena Miniature Golf
Course, which my parents built. And I was the
manager when I was nine years old, or something
like that, 11 years old. I was the manager. Yeah,
I'd babysit the cash register, drink the Cokes,
and eat the peanuts and snow cone. But there was
nothing else in town, really. Everybody came over
and played miniature golf course. It was a lot of
fun, playing miniature golf at the golf course.
There we go. that was the beginning of the era just a
second there was one other i have to do have to
digress there was another activity in town which
was the skating skating rink skating pasting it
was terrific thoroughly enjoyed it between the
captain skating rink miniature golf course
school parades and all those types of things i had a
very full life thoroughly until i had a horse too
who didn't uh 50s were also From a city government
standpoint, Pasadena was getting some strain on
the city government. The town was growing very
fast. We had a part-time city government. We had a
part-time mayor, we had a part-time councilman. I
think the councilman got like $50 a week and the
mayor got $150 a month, and the mayor got $150. The
city was growing, we're talking pushing 50,000
people, 9,000 people by the time we got to the end of
the 50s. And it began to show in the government
because some of these people were putting in quite
a bit of time and not getting any more
compensation. So there was some scandals going on
in government. They were taking a little money on
the side. They were using city employees to fix up
certain things of theirs. And it was only into the
early 60s that we were having left with a couple of
mayors that were at least reviewed for
indictment. And finally, the community realized
that, gee, we do need some full-time city
officials. And so we changed the city charter and
we went through some sort of change in that period
of time where the mayor became a full-time job and
they could afford to pay at that time $20,000,
$25,000, which was good money. So we could attract
some people. City councilmen still continue to
get small funds. It's viewed as a part-time job,
but they still spend a lot of time. But we had a
psychological change in our government format.